My research interests include anything and everything related to jumping genes!
Transposons are amazing sequences of DNA that can cut and paste themselves within the genome (McClintock 1984). I was first introduced to them when I joined Dr. Sharmistha Majumdar’s group at Indian Institute Technology Gandhinagar in december 2015. Our group works on THAP-9 which is a ‘cut and paste’ transposon, homologous to widely studied P-element transposon in Drosophila. 
When a host genome recruits a transposable element for its own functions such that it is advantageous to the host, such an event is known as molecular domestication or exaptation. Once domesticated, these elements become an essential part of cellular machinery. V(D)J recombinase responsible for antibody diversity in humans is also a result of molecular domestication of Transib transposon. We speculate the THAP-9 has undergone molecular domestication to serve some cellular function which is unknown yet. 
There are examples of transposons that are useful to the host but mostly, transposons can disrupt gene functions (Feschotte and Pritham 2007; McClintock 1984). Many studies have shown that transposons and their long non-coding RNA transcripts can drive oncogenic mutations in several cancers (Rodic´ 2015, Henssen 2017). It would be interesting to explore transposons  as potential targets for therapeutic purposes. 
I am also curious to know how transposons disrupt cellular functions and interact with the cell’s repair machinery in order to maintain a balance between jumping and causing minimum damage to the host cell. Besides transposons, I find epigenetics, chromatin biology, DNA recombination and gene rearrangements very fascinating. I have recently developed interest in computational biology to use ever increasing publicly available data for drawing important biological conclusions. 

References:
=====

* McClintock B. The significance of responses of the genome to challenge. Science. 1984;226(4676):792‐801. doi:10.1126/science.15739260
* Feschotte C, Pritham EJ. DNA transposons and the evolution of eukaryotic genomes. Annu Rev Genet. 2007;41:331‐368. doi:10.1146/annurev.genet.40.110405.090448
* Rodić N, Sharma R, Sharma R, et al. Long interspersed element-1 protein expression is a hallmark of many human cancers. Am J Pathol. 2014;184(5):1280‐1286. doi:10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.01.007
* Henssen AG, Koche R, Zhuang J, et al. PGBD5 promotes site-specific oncogenic mutations in human tumors [published correction appears in Nat Genet. 2017 Sep 27;49(10 ):1558]. Nat Genet. 2017;49(7):1005‐1014. doi:10.1038/ng.3866
